+++
title = "Release 2.2.6.e6ef9256e"
date = "2020-05-15T09:26:16"
type = "page"
hidden = true
showtitle = false
css = ["css/downloads.css", "css/releases.css"]
+++

<div class="download-container">
<div id="download-title">
<i class="gs-mdi-tag"></i>
Gaia Sky <span class="downloads-version">2.2.6</span> 
<time class="downloads-releasedate" datetime="2020-05-15T09:26:16" title="Published: 2020-05-15T09:26:16"><i class="gs-mdi-calendar"></i> 2020-05-15</time>
<div class="downloads-build">Build e6ef9256e</div></div>
<div class="download-section">
<a href="https://gaia.ari.uni-heidelberg.de/gaiasky/releases/2.2.6.e6ef9256e/gaiasky-2.2.6.e6ef9256e.tar.gz" class="download-button"><i class="gs-mdi-zip-box icon-button"></i> TGZ package <code>.tar.gz</code><span class="download-sub">gaiasky-2.2.6.e6ef9256e.tar.gz</span></a>
<span class="signature">no signature</span>
<a href="https://gaia.ari.uni-heidelberg.de/gaiasky/releases/2.2.6.e6ef9256e/gaiasky_linux_2_2_6_e6ef9256e.deb" class="download-button"><i class="gs-mdi-debian icon-button"></i> DEB package <code>.deb</code><span class="download-sub">gaiasky_linux_2_2_6_e6ef9256e.deb</span></a>
<span class="signature">no signature</span>
<a href="https://gaia.ari.uni-heidelberg.de/gaiasky/releases/2.2.6.e6ef9256e/gaiasky_linux_2_2_6_e6ef9256e.rpm" class="download-button"><i class="gs-mdi-fedora icon-button"></i> RPM package <code>.rpm</code><span class="download-sub">gaiasky_linux_2_2_6_e6ef9256e.rpm</span></a>
<span class="signature">no signature</span>
<a href="https://gaia.ari.uni-heidelberg.de/gaiasky/releases/2.2.6.e6ef9256e/gaiasky_macos_2_2_6_e6ef9256e.dmg" class="download-button"><i class="gs-fa6-brands-apple icon-button"></i> macOS <code>.dmg</code><span class="download-sub">gaiasky_macos_2_2_6_e6ef9256e.dmg</span></a>
<span class="signature">no signature</span>
<a href="https://gaia.ari.uni-heidelberg.de/gaiasky/releases/2.2.6.e6ef9256e/gaiasky_unix_2_2_6_e6ef9256e.sh" class="download-button"><i class="gs-token-unix icon-button"></i> UNIX Installer <code>.sh</code><span class="download-sub">gaiasky_unix_2_2_6_e6ef9256e.sh</span></a>
<span class="signature">no signature</span>
<a href="https://gaia.ari.uni-heidelberg.de/gaiasky/releases/2.2.6.e6ef9256e/gaiasky_windows-x64_2_2_6_e6ef9256e.exe" class="download-button"><i class="gs-fa6-brands-windows icon-button"></i> Windows x86-64 <code>.exe</code><span class="download-sub">gaiasky_windows-x64_2_2_6_e6ef9256e.exe</span></a>
<span class="signature">no signature</span>
</div>
</div>

<section class="release-notes">

# Release Notes

### Bug Fixes
- Camera turn depends on fov.
- Stars with negative parallaxes use default [#329](https://gitlab.com/langurmonkey/gaiasky/issues/329).
- Load VO table crash on Windows [#329](https://gitlab.com/langurmonkey/gaiasky/issues/329).
- Program crash when minimizing in windows [#333](https://gitlab.com/langurmonkey/gaiasky/issues/333).
- Do not assume default location for hip, pass as argument.
- File count value when max number of files is specified.
- Safecheck to prevent window sizes of 0x0 on resize events with AMD graphics on windows.
- Transition from point to billboard in star shading.
- Remove rounding in generic dialog positioning for smooth rendering.
- Adjust brightness scalings, remove unused variables and parameters.
- Wrong synchronize location in streaming octree loader [#332](https://gitlab.com/langurmonkey/gaiasky/issues/332).
- Camera mode change in SAMP select row call.
- GoToObject() skip fix.
- SAMP local icon to work with dev version and releases.
- Get object positions by name in particle groups.
- Fix UI layout of date dialog.
- Star cluster loader to use mas/yr instead of deg/yr as proper motion units.
- Several fixes (UI, STIL), see desc.
- Load multiple catalogs with same name.
- Slider step and control buttons size.
- Double stars caused by incorrect shading.

### Build System
- Fix publish-javadoc script.
- Update build script to latest gradle version.
- More robust way to get size and nobjects from generated catalogs.
- Improve catalog generation scripts for faster deployment.
- Add/update scripts to build catalogs.
- Fix build files.
- Add catalogpack script.
- Update build and installer scripts to install4j8.
- Update data descriptor with new base and hi-res texture packs.
- Add bookmarks and VR.md to build, update modes to gradle 6.x.
- Update to gradle 6.2.2, prepare build files for gradle 7.
- Pkgbuild epoch set to 2 by default.

### Code Refactoring
- Use java collections instead of libgdx's, implement parallel loading in octree gen.
- Update DR2 loader to generic csv loader. Add compatibility mode to binary data format for tycho ids (tgas/DR2).
- ColourUtils -> ColorUtils.
- Use local application icon for SAMP.
- Move default location of mappings file to config folder.
- Fix spacing in focus info interface names.
- Update data descriptor for new star clusters load mechanism.
- Star clusters to use the catalog infrastructure.
- Move all file operations to nio (Path).

### Documentation
- Update gaiasky VR info in repo.
- Improve run from source for Windows in readme file.
- Update VR docs and readme file to include new VR build.
- Fix setCameraSpeedLimit() API docs.
- Fix typos in comments for star/particle groups.

### Features
- Better random text generator.
- Fov-based visibility, autoremove popups.
- Adjust size and intensity of stars in milky way model.
- Add ref epoch to catalog descriptors and loaders.
- Magnitude and color corrections (reddening, extinction) are now applied by default if ag and ebp_min_rp are available. Flag is now needed to explicitly deactivate them.
- Redefine eDR3 catalogs.
- Add procedural star shader, muted for now.
- New star shading method.
- Replace fibonacci numbers for made-up phrases.
- Update distance font to include more characters.
- Add crash window with tips and instructions on how to fix/report the problem.
- Add shortucts for 'show log' and 'open catalog'.
- Make all limit/target frame rates floating-point numbers.
- Comments in camera path files: prepend '#' to comment.
- Limit framerate to target framerate in camrecorder.
- API call to record camera path with given filename.
- Use votable units for star clusters if available.
- Load star clusters with STIL so that it also works via SAMP.
- Set fov step to 0.1 to have smoother fov changes.
- Grid annotations contain degree symbol and sign (latitude only).
- Select first object in newly loaded catalogs.
- Add icons to bookmarks tree.
- Additional cameraTransition() that accepts camera position in Km.
- Add folders to bookmarks.
- Add bookmarks module.
- Move individual visibility to own dialog.
- Several UI fixes and QOL improvements.
- Add label colors to star cluster datasets, update docs ref.
- Multiple name support for star cluster loader.
- Add description to star clusters dataset loader.
- Star clusters can now be loaded with the rest of the catalog info infrastructure.
- Velocity vectors sliders to use new slider plus.
- Cap length of long ids in focus info interface, add tooltips, fix skins.
- Show criteria for catalog chooser.
- Add sensitivity and power function to controller properties.
- Adjust focus info style to make it more compact.
- Add exit confirmation setting and checkbox in preferences window and exit dialog.
- Add pointer guides.
- Adjust star brightness parameters.
- Improve VOTable loader with default units and more safechecks.
- Clean up HiDPI themes, slightly reduce icon sizes and spacings.
- Add URL bar to file chooser.
- Add limits to particle sizes.
- Improve file chooser dialog.
- Particles get right name in focus info interface.
- Particle datasets may have per-particle names.

### Reverts
- Fix: remove rounding in generic dialog positioning for smooth rendering.

</section>


<p class="center-text" style="padding: 30px;"><a href="/downloads/releases"><i class="gs-mdi-arrow-left-bold-circle"></i> Back to releases</a>
</p>
