+++
title = "Release 3.6.11.e03d32c84"
date = "2025-07-28T09:06:50"
type = "page"
hidden = true
showtitle = false
css = ["css/downloads.css", "css/releases.css"]
+++

<div class="download-container">
<div id="download-title">
<i class="gs-mdi-tag"></i>
Gaia Sky <span class="downloads-version">3.6.11</span> 
<time class="downloads-releasedate" datetime="2025-07-28T09:06:50" title="Published: 2025-07-28T09:06:50"><i class="gs-mdi-calendar"></i> 2025-07-28</time>
<div class="downloads-build"><i class="gs-mdi-script-text"></i> <a href="#release-notes">Release notes</a> &mdash; Build <a href="https://codeberg.org/gaiasky/gaiasky/commit/e03d32c84" target="_blank">e03d32c84</a></div></div>
<div class="download-section">
</div>
</div>

<section class="release-notes">

# Release Notes


## Features
- Add `transition_fov()` (APIv2) and `fovTransition()` (APIv1) calls to create smooth transitions in camera field of view angle.
- Add `set_label_[in|ex]clude_regexp` calls to filter allowed and/or required label formats. If the include regexp is set, only labels that match it are allowed. If the exclude regexp is set, labels that match it are not allowed.
- Add `set_mute_label()` APIv2 call (`setMuteLabel()` APIv1) to disable the label of individual objects.
- Add `get_fov()` API call to APIv2, and `getFov()` to APIv1 to get the current camera field of view angle.

## Bug Fixes
- Disable render stage of notifications interface when notifications are off instead of just preventing the creation of messages; This is so that the empty table background is not seen when notifications are off.
- Add scroll pane to layout of enabled datasets in welcome window. Add 'disable dataset' shortcut to each dataset.
- Fix overall visual consistency and usability of enabled datasets in welcome window.
- Keep clouds on the dark side of planets marginally visible instead of making them totally disappear during the night.
</section>


<p class="center-text" style="padding: 30px;"><a href="/downloads/releases"><i class="gs-mdi-arrow-left-bold-circle"></i> Back to releases</a>
</p>
